# Volume Signal

### Does Trading Volume Predict Stock Returns? In- and out-of-Sample Evidence from the U.S. and International Market
- Both trading volume and price changes (returns) are related to the arrival of information to the market. Thus volume and price movement may jointly depend on the intensity of information flow.
- Sub-sample analysis shows that trading volume’s out-of-sample forecasting ability declines significantly over the last ten years. One possible explanation for the weaker predictive power is that rapid growth of trading volume has been associated with cost saving and gains in market efficiency in the form of narrowing bid-ask price spreads observed during this period. 
- Trading volume in the U.S. market in general does not contain additional information for forecasting returns in other markets after controlling for past returns, volume, and volatility information from domestic markets as well as past U.S. market returns.
- In Campbell, Grossman, and Wang’s (1993) model, investors are heterogeneous but the market is characterized by symmetric information. The model predicts that price changes accompanied by high volume will tend to be reversed which is less true for prices changes on days with low volume.
- Wang (1994) develops an equilibrium model of stock trading in which investors have rational expectations but are heterogeneous in their information and private investment opportunities. Therefore, trading volume is always positively correlated with absolute price changes, with the association increasing with information asymmetry. 
- Blume, Easley, and O’Hara (1994) develop an equilibrium model in which aggregate supply is fixed and traders receive signals with differing quality. They show how volume, information precision, and price movements are related to each other.
- Malcolm and Stein (2004) build a behavior model that seeks to explain why increases in liquidity like spreads, depth, and trading volume, carry information about the extent to which irrational traders are influential in the market, and hence about expected returns at both firm and
market levels.
- Chordia and Swaminathan (2000) find that daily or weekly returns of stocks with high trading volume lead returns of stocks with low trading volume, which, they argue, is related to the tendency of high volume stocks to respond rapidly and low volume stocks to respond slowly to marketwide information.
- Most studies that examine the contemporaneous behavior of volume and absolute price changes have documented a positive correlation between the two. 
- According to Wang (1994), uninformed investors trade against informed investors' private information. They also trade to revise their positions as the true state of the economy is revealed. These two components in the trading each lead to a different dynamic relation between volume and return. A high  return accompanied by high volume implies high future returns if the first component dominates and low future returns if the second component dominates.
- Llorente et al. (2002) offer similar predictions that the relation of current return, volume, and future returns depends on the relative significance of speculative trade versus hedging trade.
- The appropriate definition of trading volume is turnover, which is the ratio between shares traded and shares outstanding. 


### Dynamic Volume-Return Relation of Individual Stocks

- Using a simple model in which investors trade to share risks or speculate on private information, we show the return generated by risk-sharing trades tend to reverse themselves, while return generated by speculative trades tend to continue themselves. 
- The cross-sectional variation in the relationship between volume and return autocorrelation is related to the extent of informed trading in a manner consistent with the theoretical prediction.
- What we can learn from volume depends on why investors trade and how trades with different motives relates to prices. 
- Two reasons: to rebalance portfolio for risk sharing (hedging trade), or to speculate on private information (speculative trade)
- For investors selling stocks for hedging trades, the price needs to decrease to attract other people to buy. Since nothing about this stock changes, the price will bounce back. 
- For investors selling stocks for speculative trades, the price will go even lower due to the private information.
- So hedging trades generate negatively autocorrelated returns, speculative trades generate positively autocorrelated returns.
- For these to work, the trading volume must be high to have either a high percentage of hedging trades or a high percentage of speculative trades. 
- Proxies of fraction of speculative trades in different stocks: information asymmetry, bid-ask spread, market cap.
- Smaller firms or with big spread show momentum after high-volume days, large firms or with small spread show mean-reversal.
- Returns are more sustainable on high volume days than low volume days.
- Information asymmetry between investors can affect serial autocorrelation in returns.
- Hasbrouch measures the how the trade impact might be related to the inventory control of specialists and to the private information behind trades. 
- Basically, the gist of the paper can be expressed using its equation (9), (11), (12), as
$$r_{t+1} = \theta V_t r_{t}$$
where $\theta$ is positive for speculative trades and negative for hedging trades and can be considered as a function of information asymmetry, $V_t$ is volume and means the response to previous day's return is stronger when volume is larger. 


### Stock Prices and Volume

- Four empirical regularities are found: (i) positive correlation between conditional volatility and volume; (ii) large price movements are followed by high volume; (iii) conditioning on lagged volume substantially attenuates the 'leverage" effect; and (iv) after conditioning on lagged volume, there is a positive risk-return relation, this means the expected return is positive related to expected volaitity after controlling for lagged volume.
- A positive correlation between the absolute value of stock price changes and volume (contemporaneous relation)
- Price changes lead to volume movements. The effect is fairly symmetric, with large price declines having nearly the same impact on subsequent volume as large price increases.
- If volume is excluded from the analysis, then the conditional variance function of the price change given the lagged price change is found
to be symmetric over most of the range of the data, but asymmetric in the extreme tails (outermost 10 percent of the data). When volume is introduced into the analysis, it interacts with the asymmetry in interesting ways. The asymmetric response of volatility is found to be mainly a feature of large price movements accompanied by high volume. It is much less a feature of price movements of the same magnitude on average volume. 


### The Relation Between Price Changes and Trading Volume: A Survey

- Volume is positively related to the magnitude of the price change and, in equity markets,to the price change per se. 

### Filter Rules Based on Price and Volume in Individual Security Overreaction

- Decreasing-volume stocks experience greater reversals. Increasing-volume stocks exhibit weaker reversals and positive autocorrelation.
- Most contrarian studies find the largest level of return predictability in smallcapitalization stocks, which are more likely to have larger percentages of their profitability attributable to a lead-lag effect and to experience higher transaction costs.
- Related studies [see DeBondt (1989) for a review] show that individuals tend to overreact to a greater degree when confronted with a larger information shock relative to their prior base-rate expectations. This realization leads DeBondt and Thaler (1985) to postulate an overreaction hypothesis that states: "(1) Extreme movements in stock prices will be followed by extreme movements in the opposite direction. (2) The more extreme the initial movement, the greaterwill be the subsequent adjustment"(p. 795).
- The strategy only invest in securities thathave experienced movements in lagged returns and growth in volume of at least as large a magnitude as the
filter value.
- Incorporating volume improves the predictability of returns,in a manner which supports Wang (1994). High-growth-in-volume stocks tend to exhibit weaker reversals and even positive autocorrelation,and low-growthin-volume securities experience greaterreversals. In addition, a security is more likely to have greaterreversals if it has incurred two, rather than just one, consecutive weeks of losses or gains.
- Instead of using trading volume, this paper uses growth in volume shown in equation (3), and it measures how fast the volume grows with respect to previous day/week.

### Trading Volume and Serial Correlation in Stock Returns

- For both stock indexes and individual large stocks, the first-order daily return autocorrelation tends to decline with volume. 
- The paper explains this phenomenon using a model in which risk-averse "market makers" accommodate buying or selling pressure from "liquidity" or "noninformational" traders. Changing expected stock returns reward market makers for playing this role. The model implies that a stock price decline on a high-volume day is more likely than a stock price decline on a low-volume day to be associated with an increase in the expected stock return.
- Suppose that one observes a fall in stock prices. This could be due to public information that has caused all investors to reduce their valuation of the stock market, or it could be due to exogenous selling pressure by noninformational traders. In the former case, there is no reason why the expected return on the stock market should have changed. In the latter case, market makers buying stock will require a higher expected return, so there will tend to be price increases on subsequent days. The two cases can be distinguished by looking at trading volume. If public information has arrived, there is no reason to expect a high volume of trade, whereas selling pressure by noninformational traders must reveal itself in unusual volume. Thus, the model with heterogeneous investors suggests that price changes accompanied by high volume will tend to be reversed; this will be less true of price changes on days with low volume.
- The ratio of the number of shares traded to the number of shares outstanding is known as turnover, or sometimes as relative volume. Turnover is used as the volume measure in most previous studies (forexample, Jain and Joh [I9881and Mulherin and Gerety [19891).Since the number of shares outstandingand the number of shares traded have both grown steadily over time, the use of turnover helps to reduce the low-frequency variation in the series.
- The first daily autocorrelation of stock returns is lower on high-volume days than on low-volume days. This phenomenon appears even in very large stock indexes and individual stock returns, so that it is unlikely to be due to nonsynchronous stock trading. We have proposed an alternative explanation relying on the idea that trading volume occurs when random shifts in the stock demand of noninformational traders are accommodated by risk-averse market-makers. If we allow large transitory shifts in noninformational demand, then our model fits many of the features of the data.

### Trading Volume and Cross-Autocorrelation in Stock Returns

- Daily and weekly returns on high volume portfolios leads returns on low volume portfolios, controlling for firm size. 
- The different speed of adjustment to information is a significant source of the cross-autocorrelation patterns in short-horizon stock returns.
- Lo and MacKinlay find that positive autocorrelations in portfolio returns are due to positive cross-autocorrelations among individual security returns. Specifically, they find that the correla- tion between lagged large firm stock returns and current small firm returns is higher than the correlation between lagged small firm returns and cur- rent large firm returns.
- The explanations that have been proposed for these cross-autocorrelation patterns (see Mech ~1993) can be classified into three groups. The first group of explanations claims that cross-autocorrelations are the result of time-varying expected returns (see Conrad and Kaul ~1988). A variant of this explanation suggests that cross-autocorrelations are simply a restatement of portfolio autocorrelations and contemporaneous correlations ~see Hameed ~1997! and Boudoukh, Richardson, and Whitelaw ~1994!!. Once account is taken of portfolio autocorrelations, according to this explanation, portfolio cross-autocorrelations should disappear. 
- The second group of explanations ~see Boudoukh et al.! suggests that portfolio autocorrelations and cross-autocorrelations are the result of market microstructure biases such as thin trading.
- The final explanation for the lead-lag cross-autocorrelations claims that these lead-lag effects are due to the tendency of some stocks to adjust more slowly ~underreact! to economy-wide information than others ~see Lo and MacKinlay ~1990! and Brennan, Jegadeesh, and Swaminathan ~1993!!
- High volume portfolio returns significantly predict low volume portfolio returns even in the largest size quartile.
- Both daily and weekly autocorrelations also decline with firm size.
- If security prices adjust slowly to information, then price increases ~de- creases! will be followed by increases ~decreases!. This would give rise to positive autocorrelation in stock returns.
- On the other hand, positive portfolio autocorrelations are also symptomatic of non- trading problems. 
- We identify stocks that contribute the most or the least to portfolio autocorrelations and cross-autocorrelations and examine their ex ante firm characteristics. We want to determine if trading volume emerges as an im- portant characteristic in explaining the differences in the speed of adjust- ment across the two groups of stocks.


### Market liquidity as a sentiment indicator

- We build a model that helps to explain why increases in liquidity—such as lower bid–ask spreads, a lower price impact of trade, or higher turnover–predict lower subsequent returns in both firm-level and aggregate data. 
- The model features a class of irrational investors, who underreact to the information contained in order flow, thereby boosting liquidity. In the presence of short-sales constraints, high liquidity is a symptom of the fact that the market is dominated by these irrational investors, and hence is overvalued.
- This theory can also explain how managers might successfully time the market for seasoned equity offerings, by simply following a rule of thumb that involves issuing when the SEO market is particularly liquid.
- Amihud and Mendelson (1986), Brennan and Subrahmanyam (1996), and Brennan et al. (1998) find that measures of increased liquidity, including a low price impact of trade, low bid–ask spreads and high share turnover, are associated with lower future returns in cross sections of individual firms.
- The traditional explanation for why liquidity might affect expected returns: Investors anticipate having to sell their shares at some point in the future, and recognize that when they do so, they will face transactions costs. These costs can stem either from the inventory considerations of risk-averse market makers or from problems of adverse selection.2 But in either case, when the transactions costs are greater, investors rationally discount the asset in question by more.
- In a univariate regression, a one-standard-deviation increase in stochastically detrended turnover (equivalent to turnover going from, say, the 1932–1998 mean of 30 percent up to 42 percent in a given year) reduces expected returns on the CRSP equal-weighted index over the next year by approximately 13 percent.
- Our model rests on two sets of assumptions—one about market frictions, and the other about investor behavior. With respect to the former, we assume that there are short-sales constraints. With respect to the latter, we posit the existence of a class of irrationally overconfident investors, where we think of overconfidence as a tendency to overestimate the relative precision of one’s own private signals.
- In our setting, this form of overconfidence has two distinct manifestations. First, when overconfident investors receive private signals, they tend to overweight them; this leads to ‘‘sentiment shocks’’ that can be either positive or negative. Second, when overconfident investors observe the trading decisions of others, they tend to underreact to the information contained in these decisions, since they (erroneously) consider others to be less well-informed than they are. This aspect of overconfidence lowers the price impact of trades, thus boosting liquidity generally.
- The short-sales constraint implies that irrational investors will only be active in the market when their valuations are higher than those of rational investors—i.e., when their sentiment is positive and when the market is, as a result, overvalued.
- Firms that issue equity have low stock returns in the subsequent few years—this is the so-called ‘‘new issues puzzle’’. If economy- wide equity issuance is high in a given year, the market as a whole performs poorly in the next year. The usual interpretation of these facts is that the managers making issuance decisions are ‘‘smart money’’: they have a better estimate of the long-run fundamental value of their firms than is embodied in the current market price, and they purposefully time their financing decisions to exploit this advantage.
- Suppose that managers are more willing to issue equity in periods when the market for new offerings is more liquid, in the sense of there being a reduced adverse price impact upon the announcement of a new issue. If they behave this way, their financing choices will be a passive mirror of market liquidity, and will thus, for the reasons outlined above, tend to forecast returns. This mechanism can work even if managers never bother to take a stand on the relationship between prices and long-run fundamental value.

### Price Momentum and Trading Volume

- Firms with high/low past turnover ratios exhibit many glamour/value characteristics, earn lower/higher future returns, and have consistently more negative/positive earnings surprises over the next eight quarters.
- Past trading volume also predicts both the magnitude and persistence of price momentum. Specifically, price momentum effects reverse over the next five years, and high/low volume winners/losers experience faster reversals. 
- Past volume helps to reconcile intermediate-horizon “underreaction” and long-horizon “overreaction” effects.
- Firms whose recent volume is higher ~lower! than volume four years ago experience significantly lower ~higher! future returns. The change in volume measures abnormal trading activity and is unlikely to be a liquid- ity proxy.
- We find that low(high) volume stocks display many characteristics commonly associated with value(glamour) investing. Specifically, lower(higher)trading volume is associated with worse(better) current operating performance, larger(smaller) declines in past operating performance, higher(lower) book-to-market ratios, lower(higher) analyst followings, lower(higher) long-term earnings growth estimates, higher(lower) factor loadings on the Fama–French HML factor, and lower(higher) stock returns over the previous five years.
- Higher(lower) future returns experienced by low(high) volume stocks are related to investor misperceptions about future earnings. Analysts provide lower(higher) long-term earnings growth forecasts for low(high) volume stocks. However, low(high) volume firms experience significantly better(worse) future operating performance. 
- Campbell, Grossman, and Wang (1993) present a model in which trading volume proxies for the aggregate demand of liquidity traders. 
- Conrad et al. show that, at weekly intervals, the price reversal pattern is observed only for heavily traded stocks; less traded stocks exhibit return continuation.
- According to the liquidity hypothesis, firms with relatively low trading volume are less liquid and therefore command a higher expected return. 
- Price and volume are simultaneously determined in equilibrium. What- ever process generates price also gives rise to the accompanying trading volume. 
- First, we show that trading volume, as measured by the turnover ratio, is unlikely to be a liquidity proxy. Although high/low volume firms earn lower/higher future returns, the opposite is true in the past. Trading volume is not highly correlated with firm size or relative bid-ask spread, and the volume effect is independent of the firm size effect.
- Rather, our evidence shows that the information content of trading volume is related to market misperceptions of firms’ future earnings prospects. Specifically, we provide strong evidence that low/high volume stocks tend to be under/over-valued by the market. This evidence includes past operating and market performance, current valuation multiples and operating perfor- mance, and future operating performance and earnings surprises. One im- plication of our finding is that investor expectations affect not only a stock’s returns but also its trading activity.
- We find volume “fuels” momentum only for losers and it helps informa- tion “diffusion” only for winners.
- Table IX shows that analysts are more optimistic ~pessimistic! for high ~low! volume stocks but future changes in profitability fail to meet expec- tations. Thus, trading volume seems to provide information about inves- tors’ misperception of future earnings.

### Testing for Linear and Nonlinear Granger Causality in the Stock Price- Volume Relation

- We find evidence of significant bidirectional nonlinear causality between returns and volume. 
- After controlling for volatility persistence in returns, we continue to find evidence of nonlinear causality from volume to returns.
- In the mixture model of Epps and Epps (1976), trading volume is used to measure disagreement as traders revise their reservation prices based on the arrival of new information into the market. The greater the degree of disagreement among traders, the larger the level of trading volume. Their model suggests a positive causal relation running from trading volume to absolute stock returns.
- A positive causal relation from volume to stock returns is consistent with the assumption made in these models that the trading strategies pursued by noise traders cause stock prices to move.
- Campbell, Grossman, and Wang (1993) develop a model, with two classes of risk-averse traders, which has implications for the autocorrelation properties of stock returns as a nonlinear function of trading volume. In their model, market makers take the opposite side of liquidity-induced trades only if they are compensated with an increase in expected stock returns. There is an abnormally large increase in volume followed by stock return reversals for such trades. In contrast, for information-related trades, stock prices move to their new equilibrium levels without reversals. Campbell, Grossman, and Wang (1993) find empirical support for their model's prediction that stock return autocorrelations decline with trading volume.


### Persistence of the Dow Jones Index on Rising Volume
- Previous results on the negative relation between volume and persistence are replicated
- Persistence is directly related to the current rate of change of volume
- This effect appears much stronger for postive returns than negative returns

### Trades, quotes, inventories, and information
- For low volume stocks, the autocorrelation of trades is negative, consistent with inventory of market makers. 
- To classify mid-point trades, we can do the following: when a midpoint transaction is found to be contemporaneous with a transaction at a quote price, the buy/sell of the latter is applied to the former. When a transaction at a posted quote occurs after a midpoint transaction, but before a quote revision, the mid point is taken as the de-facto quote. When quote revision immediately follows a midpoint transaction, the order type is inferred from the direction of quote revision. In this view, a midpoint transaction indicates the de-facto quote by marking the side of the market opposite the direction of the movement. 
- The inventory control can explain the return reversal at corresponding horizon.
- The impact of trades on quote mid price change is positive at small lag, and negative at long lag due to inventory conrol.
- For stocks with high volume, large order has larger impact on mid-quote price return. Hence larger orders convey more information.

### The High-Volume Return Premium
- Stocks experiencing unusually high ~low! trading volume over a day or a week tend to appreciate ~depreciate! over the course of the following month.
- We argue that this high-volume return premium is consistent with the idea that shocks in the trading activity of a stock affect its visibility, and in turn the subsequent demand and price for that stock.
- Trading activity shocks, as measured by volume shocks, affect the pool for potential investors through a variety of communication channels like the news, word of mouth, or, more recently, the Internet.
- We reinforce the plausibility of this visibility hypothesis by showing that the high-volume return premium is not a simple by-product of the effect that trading volume has on return autocorrelations. In fact, this premium is just as prevalent for stocks that experience little or no price change at the time of their abnormal trading volume. In other words, price movements are not needed for volume shocks to have predictive power over future returns.
- Past losers, which are more likely to have fallen out of the inves- tors’ radar, are especially affected by volume shocks. Moreover, for these stocks, the effects of positive volume shocks are similar in magnitude to the effects of negative volume shocks.
- The returns of our volume-based strategies are unexplained by the stocks’ bid-ask spreads.
- Miller ~1977! and Mayshar ~1983! argue that, if traders have diverse opinions about the value of a stock, the traders who end up holding that stock will be the most optimistic about its value. They further argue that if the stock’s supply is limited because of constraints on short-selling, the opinions of the pessimistic traders will fail to be incorporated into the stock’s price, which will then only reflect the optimistic opinions of the stockholders. In that situation, any positive shock in the number of people paying attention to a given stock ~i.e., any increase in the stock’s visibility! increases the number of potential buyers, but leaves the number of poten- tial sellers largely unchanged ~e.g., if short-selling is impossible, the poten- tial sellers only include the current stockholders!. This will tend to increase the stock’s price. 
- The mere inclusion of a stock into the S&P500 index causes its price to rise.
- In theory, high volume does not indicate that the stock will rise ~it may be caused by heavy selling!, and merely observing heavy volume should not cause anyone to buy. However, if the volume does attract attention and cause more people to look at a stock, some are likely to persuade themselves that the stock should be bought.
- Merton ~1987! develops a general equilibrium model in which stocks that are ignored by a large fraction of the investors will tend to sell at a discount when compared to otherwise similar stocks, because aggregate risk is then absorbed by fewer agents. All these authors argue that, in such cir- cumstances, it becomes a viable strategy for a firm to “advertise” its stock, even in the absence of news, as this can only increase its investor base and, in turn, its stock price.
- 

### Using Trading Volume to Understand Investment Activity

- Investors often use trading volume to confirm the existence, or a continuation, of a trend or trend reversal. Essentially, trading volume can legitimize a security's price action, which can then aid an investor in their decision to either buy or sell that security.
- Trading volume can help an investor identify momentum in a security and confirm a trend. If trading volume increases, prices generally move in the same direction. That is, if a security is continuing higher in an uptrend, the volume of the security should also increase and vice versa.
- For example, suppose company ABC's stock increased in price by 10% over the past month. An investor is interested in the company and wants to purchase 1,000 shares. They conduct a fundamental analysis of the company and see that its earnings and revenues have consistently increased over the past year. However, the investor is not confident the stock will continue in this uptrend and is worried that the trend may reverse. In this example, trading volume analysis can be very useful. The investor sees there was a steady increase in ABC's trading volume over the past month. They also notice that the trading volume was the highest that ABC stock had experienced over the past two years, and that the stock is continuing to trend higher. This signals to the investor that ABC is gaining momentum and gives them confidence that the trend should continue higher. Thus, the increase in trading volume led the investor to purchase 1,000 shares of ABC stock.
- Trading volume can also signal when an investor should take profits and sell a security due to low activity. If there is no relationship between the trading volume and the price of a security, this signals weakness in the current trend and a possible reversal.
- For example, suppose company ABC extended its uptrend for another five months and increased by 70% in six months. The investor sees that share prices of company ABC are still in an uptrend and continues to hold on to the shares. However, over the next few weeks, the stock continues in the uptrend. However, the trading volume is decreasing. This could signal to the investor that the bullish uptrend in ABC stock is beginning to lose momentum and may soon end. The following week, shares of ABC stock decrease by 10% in one trading session after being in an uptrend for six months. This move lower results in the stock breaking its uptrend trend. More significantly, the trading volume spikes higher when compared to its average daily trading volume (ADTV). The investor sells out of all the shares of ABC the next day because the combination of a sharp drop in price and spike in trading volume confirmed that the uptrend might be coming to an end and a reversal might be in the offing.


### How to Use Volume to Improve Your Trading

- Volume can be an indicator of market strength, as rising markets on increasing volume are typically viewed as strong and healthy.
- When prices fall on increasing volume, the trend is gathering strength to the downside.
- When prices reach new highs (or no lows) on decreasing volume, watch out; a reversal might be taking shape.
- On Balance Volume and Klinger Indicator are examples of charting tools that are based on volume.
- A rising market should see rising volume. Buyers require increasing numbers and increasing enthusiasm in order to keep pushing prices higher. Increasing price and decreasing volume might suggest a lack of interest, and this is a warning of a potential reversal. This can be hard to wrap your mind around, but the simple fact is that a price drop (or rise) on little volume is not a strong signal. A price drop (or rise) on large volume is a stronger signal that something in the stock has fundamentally changed.
- In a rising or falling market, we can see exhaustion moves. These are generally sharp moves in price combined with a sharp increase in volume, which signals the potential end of a trend. Participants who waited and are afraid of missing more of the move pile in at market tops, exhausting the number of buyers.
- At a market bottom, falling prices eventually force out large numbers of traders, resulting in volatility and increased volume. We will see a decrease in volume after the spike in these situations, but how volume continues to play out over the next days, weeks, and months can be analyzed using the other volume guidelines.
- Volume can be useful in identifying bullish signs. For example, imagine volume increases on a price decline and then the price moves higher, followed by a move back lower. If the price on the move back lower doesn't fall below the previous low, and volume is diminished on the second decline, then this is usually interpreted as a bullish sign.
- After a long price move higher or lower, if the price begins to range with little price movement and heavy volume, this might indicate that a reversal is underway, and prices will change direction.
- On the initial breakout from a range or other chart pattern, a rise in volume indicates strength in the move. Little change in volume or declining volume on a breakout indicates a lack of interest and a higher probability for a false breakout. 

### Evidence That Trading Volume Sustains Stock Price Changes

- The hypothesis presented here is that price changes are more likely to reverse following weak volume support than strong volume support, because price changes reflect demand for a stock and higher volume reflects a greater likelihood that the demand originates from informed rather than uninformed trade. Consequently, as volume increases, the probability that the price change is information driven increases.
- The evidence indicates that large price changes on days with weak volume support tend to reverse, at least partially, the next day.
- Returns do not reverse following days of strong volume support. In fact, large price increases with strong volume support tend to be followed by another price increase the next day.


### Market Statistics and Technical Analysis: The Role of Volume
- Volume provides information about the quality of traders’ informa- tion that cannot be deduced from the price statistic.

### Market microstructure and asset pricing: On the compensation for illiquidity in stock returns
- The theoretical models of Glosten (1989), Kyle (1985), and Easley and O’Hara (1987) and the empirical analysis of Glosten and Harris (1988)suggestthat the liquidity effects of asymmetric information are most likely to be captured in the price impact of a trade, or the variable component of trading costs.


### Volume and Autocovariances in Short-Horizon Individual Security Returns

- High-transaction securities experience price reversals, while the returns of low-transactions securities are positively autocovarying.


### A century of stock market liquidity and trading costs.
- Transaction cost measures that also proxy for liquidity – spreads and turnover – predict stock returns one year or more ahead.
- High spreads predict high stock returns; high turnover predicts low stock returns. 

### The Difference Between Bid-Ask Spread and Bid-Ask Bounce

- The bid-ask bounce is a specific situation when the price of a stock or other asset bounces back and forth within the very limited range between the bid price and ask price. This happens when there are trades on both the bid and asking price, but no real movement in price. The bounce can also occur when the bid price jumps to become equal to what the selling price was just a moment before, but then drops back to its original level.
- The bid-ask bounces causes over-estimation of stock volatility is trade price is used in the calculation, since the quote does not change in the process.


### Price, trade size, and information in securities markets

- We show that trade size introduces an adverse selection problem into security trading because, given that they wish to trade, informed traders perfer to trade larger amounts at any given price. As a result, market makers' pricing strategies must also depend on trade size, with large trades being made at less favorable prices.
- Both the size and the sequence of trades matter in determining the price-trade size relationship.
- Because large trades force market makers away from their preferred inventory positions, prices for these transac- tions must compensate specialists for bearing this inventory risk [see Stoll (1979). Ho and Stoll (1981) and O’Hara and Oldfield (1986)]. 
- This inventory or ‘liquidity effect’ hypothesis suggests that how much prices change with trade size depends on the absolute size of the trade and on the market maker’s inventory position before the trade.
- We show that quantity matters because it is correlated with private information about a security’s true value.
- Those authors demonstrate that the possibility of infor- mation-based trading can induce a spread between bid and ask prices. This spread compensates the market maker for the risk of doing business with traders who have superior information. 
- We show that the possibility of information-based trading need not always result in a bid-ask spread. Depending on market conditions, such as width (the ratio of large to small trade size) or depth (the fraction of large trades made by the unin- formed), informed traders may choose to trade only large quantities, leaving the price for small trades unaffected. 
- What matters for asset pricing is not the number (or fraction) of informed traders, but rather the fraction of trades that come from informed traders.
- In actual security markets. several factors encourage large traders to remain large. Transactions costs, for example. decline with quantity, so a trader facing large liquidity needs will prefer to trade one large quantity rather than several smaller ones. Risk aversion can also be important in the quantity decision. Since prices move over time, trading once at the known large-quantity price can dominate trading strategy
- To investigate the price effects of block trades, we must extend our model to incorporate a sequence of trades. This, in turn, requires an analysis of how market makers incorporate information learned from previous trades into their pricing strategy for future trades. Since trades can be information-based. the pattern of trades reveals something about the presence (and information) of informed traders.
- Eqs. (15) and (16) dictate that. following a block sale. the market maker sets a lower price for the next small trade. As before, the bid and ask prices for small trades are equal but, provided LYE> 0. these small-trade prices at t = 2 are strictly less than small-trade prices at t = 1. Indeed. it is easy to show that the new large-trade prices are also lower than their corresponding t = 1 levels. Because of the possibility that the block sale was triggered by adverse information about the stock’s value. market makers adjust their trading prices.
- Now a small trade following a block sale provides information because a small trade reduces the likelihood the market maker attaches to an information event having occurred. Specifically, the small trade causes market makers to put more weight on their original probability of s = L(6). 
- If market makers could know when information events occur, the uncertainty about whether any individual trader is informed could be handled by simply setting less favorable prices for large quantities. Since informed traders’ profits are increasing in quantity for any given price, this pricing strategy counters the adverse selec- tion problem that arises with trade size.
- If, more realistically, market makers do not know when such information events occur, this simple pricing strategy is no longer optimal. Now trade size matters not only because it is correlated with a trader’s information but also because it signals the e.xistence of an information event. Consequently, both the size and the sequence of trades matter in determining the price-quantity relationship.
- One important characteristic of the information-effects model, however, is that the entire sequence of past trades is informative about the Likelihood of an information event. Because the likelihood of an information event affects prices, this means that the entire sequence of trades matters in determining prices. To calculate the distribution of the next trade price. pr+ I, therefore, we need to know not only the current price, pt. but also how the market got to the current price. 


### Trading volume and prediction of stock return reversals: Conditioning on investor types' trading
- Using unique trading data by investor type from Korea, we provide explicit evidence of three distinct mechanisms leading to contrasting outcomes: (i) informed buying—price increases accompanied by high institutional buying volume are less likely to reverse; (ii) liquidity sell- ing—price declines accompanied by high institutional selling volume in insti- tutional investor habitat are more likely to reverse; (iii) attention‐driven speculative buying—price increases accompanied by high individual buying‐ volume in individual investor habitat are more likely to reverse.
- Conrad, Hameed, and Niden, (1994), who find on a sam- ple of NASDAQ stocks that reversals are more likely fol- lowing higher volume.
- In contrast, on a sample of large‐ cap NYSE‐AMEX stocks, Cooper, (1999) reports that reversals are more likely following lower volume.
- Llorente, Michaely, Saar, and Wang, (2002) find that reversals are more likely following higher volume among large‐cap stocks, against Cooper's, (1999) result.
- All these findings conflict with Stickel and Verrechia's (1994) ear- lier result that reversals are more likely following lower volume among both NYSE/AMEX and NASDAQ stocks.
- Avramov, Chordia, and Goyal, (2006) find more reversals with high‐turnover stocks after controlling for liquidity
- Theoretical work suggests that return shocks accompa- nied by high volume should be more likely to reverse if high volume is driven by noninformational (liquidity or hedging motivated) trading and less likely to reverse if it is driven by informed trading. 
- Return shocks accompanied by high volume driven by an individual investor bias, attention‐driven retail buying (Barber & Odean, 2008), are more likely to reverse. 
- three distinct mechanisms (information trading, noninformational liquidity consumption, and attention‐driven speculative retail buying)
- Winner stocks' high volume in the institutional investor habitat is associated with domestic institutions' buying, and these high‐volume winners are less likely to reverse, consistent with infor- mation trading
- loser stocks' high volume in the insti- tutional investor habitat is associated with institutional investors' selling, and these losers are more likely to reverse (over shorter horizons), consistent with noninformational consumption of liquidity by institu- tional investors
- winner stocks' high volume in the individual investor habitat is associated with individual investors' buying, with characteristics of the pattern pointing to a bias, and these winners are more likely to reverse
- Noninformational liquidity con- sumption is relatively more pronounced in the case of sell- ing, as selling may simply follow from liquidity needs, the urgency of which leads to immediate liquidity consumption. Selling is likely to lead to heavy volume when it is driven by liquidity needs. Therefore, high selling volume in loser stocks is likely to capture liquidity/hedging‐motivated trading. Thus, in institu- tional investor habitat, loser stocks' high volume is rela- tively more likely to result from institutional investors' liquidity consumption and be followed by reversals.

### A Model of Competitive Stock Trading Volume
- Investors are heterogeneous in their information and private investment op- portunities and rationally trade for both informational and nonin- formational motives.
- Informational trading and noninformational trading lead to different dynamic relations between trading volume and stock returns.
- Different heterogeneity among investors gives rise to different volume behavior and return-volume dynamics.
- Examining the joint behavior of return and volume can help one to learn about the underlying heterogeneity among investors.
- As the true state of the economy is revealed, the uninformed investors realize the mistakes in their previous trading and trade to revise their positions. In addition, they take on new positions as they perceive new needs of noninformational trading from the informed investors. These two components in the trading of the uninformed investors lead to a different dynamic relation between return and volume. In the former situation, a high realized return reveals that the unin- formed investors have underestimated the value of the stock and underinvested in the stock. Thus they buy more shares and the ex- pected future return increases. In the latter situation, a high realized return reflects a price increase due to the buying pressure of the informed investors for noninformational reasons. But the price in- crease is not related to the stock's future dividends. Thus the unin- formed investors sell their shares at the high price and the expected future return decreases. A high return accompanied by high volume implies high future returns if the first component dominates and low future returns if the second component dominates. Clearly, the first component arises only when there is informational trading. Therefore, informational trading and noninformational trading give rise to a very different dynamic relation between volume and returns.
- In the current model, trading occurs when the uninformed inves- tors change their expectations about future stock returns. The trad- ing volume directly reflects the amplitude of changes in their expecta- tions. In addition, other public information such as current dividend and price provides information about the direction of these changes. Consequently, volume together with realized dividends and prices can predict future returns.
- Under asymmetric information, however, public information reveals the true state of the economy and the mistakes of the unin- formed investors in previous estimation. The uninformed investors update their expectations and revise their previous trades. This gen- erates abnormal trading with the news release. Together with the news, the volume provides information about expected future re- turns.
- Theorem 6 states that an increase in dividend accompanied by high volume implies high future returns. A dividend change accompanied by ab- normal volume indicates that the change is unanticipated. Further- more, good news (i.e., 6D, > 0) implies that the uninformed investors have underestimated the stock's future returns. As a result, they will buy more shares of the stock and future returns will be higher. Bad news implies the opposite. This result is completely due to the infor- mation asymmetry between the two classes of investors.
- The stock price changes for two reasons: public infor- mation about its future dividends and changes in investors' private investment opportunities. In the former case, the price adjusts to fully reflect the new expectation of future dividends. There is no trading accompanying the price change, and the expected excess return on the stock remains the same. In the latter case, the price adjusts to reflect the I-investors' needs to trade and to attract the U-investors. There is trading accompanying the price change, and the expected future return changes in this case since the price has changed without changes in future dividends. Specifically, a price decrease (increase) accompanied by high volume is more likely due to the sale (purchase) by the I-investors than a decrease (increase) in future dividends. This implies high (low) future returns.
- Therefore, whether abnormal volume is generated by the price change or by the dividend change leads to opposite predictions about future returns of the stock. Since the return aggregates the dividend and price change, the expectation conditional on current volume and excess return can be different depending on which of the two effects dominates.
- Let us now consider the case with information asymmetry. Recall that under asymmetric information, the uninformed investors trade for two reasons: (1) to correct the errors made in previous trading when new information (such as changes in dividends) reveals the stock's true value and (2) to take new positions when price adjusts to reflect the need of noninformational trading from the informed investors. These two components of trading are associated with dif- ferent revisions in the uninformed investors' expectations as dis- cussed above. Suppose that a trade is generated by an unanticipated low dividend, which implies that the uninformed investors overesti- mated future dividends in the previous period. They will lower their expectations on future stock returns. The correction in expectations gives rise to the sale of the stock by the uninformed investors accom- panied by a low return in the current period as well as a decrease in expected future returns. Suppose that a trade is generated by the information that there is an increase in Zt and the informed investors are facing a good private investment opportunity. This then implies that they are selling the stock to adjust their portfolio. The unin- formed investors will buy the shares as its price decreases. The ex- pected change in Zt gives rise to the purchase of the stock by the uninformed investors accompanied by a decrease in the current price and an increase in expected future returns. Since volume does not distinguish the sign of a trade, these two components of the unin- formed investors' trading generate a different dynamic relation be- tween volume and return. If the first component dominates, a high volume accompanied by a low return implies a low return in the future. If the second component dominates, a high volume accompa- nied by a low return implies a high return in the future. It should be obvious that the first component exists only under asymmetric information when informed investors trade on private information.

### Information Effects on the Bid-Ask Spread 

- the bid-ask spread is a positive function of the price level and return variance,a negative function of measures of market activity, depth, and continuity, and negatively correlatedwith the degree of competition.
- This paper models the dealer's bid-ask spread as a tradeoff between expected losses to informed traders and expected gains from liquidity traders.
- The dealer's objective is to choose a bid-ask spread which maximizes his profits. If he sets the bid-ask spread too wide, he loses expected revenues from liquidity traders but reduces potential losses to informed traders. On the other hand, if he establishes a spread which is too narrow,the probability of losses incurring to informed traders increases, but is offset by potential revenuesfrom liquidity trading. His optimal bid-ask spread is determined by a tradeoff between expected gains from liquidity trading and expected losses to informed trading.


### Asset Pricing and the Bid-Ask Spread

- This paper suggests that expected asset returns are increasing in the (rela- tive) bid-ask spread. We first model the effects of the spread on asset returns. Our model predicts that higher-spread assets yield higher expected returns, and that there is a clientele effect whereby investors with longer holding periods select assets with higher spreads. The resulting testable hypothesis is that asset returns are an increasing and concave function of the spread. 
- The model also predicts that expected returns net of trading costs increase with the holding period, and consequently higher-spread assets yield higher net returns to their holders. Hence, an investor expecting a long holding period can gain by holding high-spread assets.
- We emphasize that the spread effect is by no means an anomaly or an indication of market in- efficiency; rather, it represents a rational response by an efficient market to the existence of the spread.
- Proposition I (clientele effect). Assets with higher spreads are allocated in equilibrium to portfolios with (the same or) longer expected holding periods.
- Proposition 2 (spread-return relationship). In equilibrium, the obserced market (gross) return is an increasing and concave piecewise-linear function of the (relative) spread.
- Intuitively, the positive association between return and spread reflects the compensation required by investors for their trading costs, and its concavity results from the clientele effect (Proposition 1). To see this, recall that transaction costs are amortized over the investor’s holding period. The longer this period, the smaller the compensation required for a given increase in the spread. Since in equilibrium higher-spread securities are acquired by investors with longer horizons, the added return required for a given increase in spread gets smaller.
- The higher yields required on higher-spread stocks give firms an incentive to increase the liquidity of their securities, thus reducing their opportunity cost of capital. Consequently, liquidity-increasing financial policies may increase the value of the firm.


### The Components of the Bid-Ask Spread: A General Approach

- This paper introduces a three-way decomposition of the spread into order processing, inventory, and adverse information components.  
- Quote adjust- ments for inventory reasons tend to be reversed over time, while quote adjustments for adverse information are not
- Trade prices also reverse (even if quotes do not), which is a measure of the order processing component.
- The spread, S, is estimated from the data and we refer to it as the traded spread. It differs from the observed posted spread, St, in that it reflects trades inside the spread but outside the midpoint. Trades inside the spread and above the midpoint are coded as ask trades, and those inside the spread and below the midpoint are coded as bid trades. If trades occur between the midpoint and the quote, S is less than the posted spread, which is the case in the data we analyze. If trades occur only at the posted bid or the posted ask, S is the posted spread.
- Serial covariance in the trade flow, Qt, plays an important role in ear- lier covariance models of the spread. In one class of models pioneered by Roll (1984), inferences about the bid-ask spread are made from the serial covari- ance properties of observed transaction prices. Following Roll, other covariance spread models include Choi, Salandro, and Shastri (1988), George, Kaul, and Nimalendran (1991), and Stoll (1989). 
- Empirical estimates of the basic model for 19 large actively traded stocks in 1992 yield estimates of the sum of adverse informa- tion and inventory effects that are relatively small proportions of the spread. However, these proportions increase dramatically when the indicator model is modified to account for medium and large trades.
- Earlier models have usually lumped inventory and order processing together.
- The models can also be used to provide estimates of the spread at which trades occur. 
- The first extension relies on the fact that inventory effects induce negative serial correlation in orders and in quotes in addition to the serial correlation from the bid-ask bounce of prices. The second extension takes a cross-section approach and uses information on trading pressures in other stocks to infer the in- ventory component of the spread in a particular stock.
- The basis for this approach is that quotes are adjusted in stock A in response to trades in other stocks in order to hedge inventory risk,  but trades in other stocks convey little information about stock A.
- The adverse information component of the spread is smaller for large trades than it is for medium and small trades. It appears that large trades are prenegotiated in such a way that the trade price fully reflects the information conveyed by the trade. 
- The midpoint reaction and the spread components vary on the basis of prior trades. For example, the adverse information effect is larger for a medium trade at the ask if the prior trade was at the ask and if the prior trade was large.

### Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist market with heterogeneously informed traders
- The presence of traders with superior information leads to a positive bid-ask spread even when the specialist is risk-neutral and makes zero expected profits. The resulting transaction prices convey information, and the expectation of the average spread squared times volume is bounded by a number that is independent of insider activity. The serial correlation of transaction price dif- ferences is a function of the proportion of the spread due to adverse selection. 
- The core idea is that the specialist faces an adverse selection problem, since a customer agreeing to trade at the specialist’s ask or bid price may be trading because he knows something that the specialist does not. In effect, then, the specialist must recoup the losses suffered in trades with the well informed by gains in trades with liquidity traders. 
- The serial correlation coefficient of price changes can be used to determine the relative magnitudes of these two sources of the spread - adverse selection and specialist costs or profits.
- Generally, ask prices increase and bid prices decrease if the insiders’ informa- tion becomes better, or the insiders become more numerous relative to liquidity traders, or the elasticity of the expected supply and demand of a liquidity trader increases.
- Insiders have information that results in a wide spread that precludes trade that prevents insiders from revealing their information through their trading behavior. 
- If the annual report for small firms tend to contain considerable new information and if insiders have early access to that information, then our analysis would predict that spreads are especially large in the period before the report is made public and presumably after the end of the firm’s fiscal year. 
- To motivate the active participation of the uninformed traders in a model where everyone is rational, there must be some disparity of preferences or endownments across individuals. This disparity may arise from predictable life cycle needs or from less predictable events such as job promotions or unemployment, deaths or disabilities, or myriad other causes. 
- Each participant assigns random utility to shares of stock, x, and current consumption, c, as px V + c, where p is a parameter of the individual investor’s utility function representing his personal trade-off between current and future consumption derived from ownership of the asset. For the specialist, we take p = 1; this is just a normalization. Generally, a high p indicates a desire to invest for the future; a low p indicates a desire for current consumption. This ‘liquidity parameter’ could be the result of imperfect access to capital markets or it could represent differential subjective assessments of the distribution of the random variable I’. The risk neutrality assumption implies that in order for there to be trade, there must be some variation in p across market participants, for otherwise the ‘no trade theorem’ of Milgrom and Stokey (1982) implies that the spread will be set large enough to preclude all trade. 
- The ask price is what the revised expectation of V will be if the specialist sells, and the bid is what the revised expectation will be if the specialist buys. Thus, once the bid and ask prices are specified, not only do we know that the possible transaction prices are, but we also know what the possible revised expectations of V are. 
- This proposition also suggests a lagged statistical relation between volume and the spread. Specifically, suppose the level of insider activity is positively related to volume. When the specialist sees unexpectedly high volume, he will revise upward his estimate of the probability of an insider arrival and increase the spread accordingly. Thus, this proposition would suggest a positive correla- tion between past volume and current spread.
- the average magnitude of the spread depends on many parameters, including the exogenous arrival patterns of insiders and liquidity traders, the elasticity of supply and demand among liquidity traders, and the quality of the information held by insiders.

















